The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Bath Tatting Book, by P. P.


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The Bath Tatting Book


Author: P. P.



Release Date: July 16, 2008  [eBook #26068]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BATH TATTING BOOK***


E-text prepared by Siobhan Hillman, Susan Skinner, Emmy, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 26068-h.htm or 26068-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/6/0/6/26068/26068-h/26068-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/6/0/6/26068/26068-h.zip)





THE BATH TATTING BOOK.

by

P. P.







Price One Shilling.

London:
Emily Faithfull,
_Printer and Publisher in Ordinary to Her Majesty_,
83A Farringdon Street, And 14 Princes Street,
Hanover Square.
1865.

[Illustration]




TERMS AND DIRECTIONS.


      _A Loop_, written L; 2 _Loops_, written 2 L, and so on.

      _Single stitches_--Are formed in two ways: First, by
         letting the thread of the shuttle with which you
         are working fall over the back of the hand and
         pushing the shuttle from you. Secondly, by letting
         the thread of the shuttle with which you are
         working fall over the palm of the hand, and putting
         the shuttle through _towards_ you. These two
         stitches worked together alternately make a _Double
         stitch_. But if the second be worked first and the
         first second, alternately, it makes a _Reversed
         Double_. This is used for the purpose of making all
         the work have a right and wrong side.

     _2 Threads_--When 2 threads are used, twist the one
         with which the stitches are to be made round the
         little finger, and proceed as above.

     _Double stitch_, written D; 2 _Double stitches_,
         written 2 D, &c.

     _Reversed Double stitch_, written R D; 2 _Reversed
         Double stitches_, written 2 R D, &c.

     _Loops_--Are made by putting the thread with which
         double stitches are made over a pin, and there must
         be _one_ or more _Double stitches_ between each
         loop. By holding the pin point towards the right
         hand, between the forefinger and thumb of the left,
         the thread can be lifted over by the 2nd finger of
         the right hand, and many loops made without
         removing it. With reversed double stitches, the
         thread is lifted over by the shuttle as the 2nd
         stitch is being made. Loops can also be made by
         putting the shuttle thread over the pin.

     _Ovals_--Form the cotton of the shuttle you are
         directed to work with into a loop round the hand,
         and begin working the stitches. If composed of
         double stitches only (with perhaps one loop in the
         centre), it is called a _plain oval_. If of several
         loops, a _looped oval_.

     _A Join_--Is always made by drawing the thread with
         which the stitches are worked through the specified
         loop or space, and passing the shuttle through the
         loop formed by the thread thus drawn through,
         making it equal in length to an ordinary loop. To
         make a join, 2 threads or an oval are necessary.

     _To Tie_--This is done by drawing the thread on the
         shuttle with which you are working through the
         specified loop or space (or round some thread), and
         putting the same shuttle through the loop so
         formed, always drawing it _quite_ tight. It may
         sometimes be necessary to do this with the other
         thread; but it is done in the same way, with _one_
         thread _only_, and always drawn quite tight.

     _To Attach_--Proceed as in tying--only pass the shuttle
         round the _second thread_ before putting it through
         the loop, and drawing tight. This ties in the
         _second thread_, which cannot be so securely done
         by ordinary joining.




FIRST DOYLEY.


_Raised Cornflower for the First Doyley. Ardern's crochet cotton No. 8
and Pin No. 2._

_1st Row._ Begin an oval, work 2 D (L, 2 D 8 times) draw up, but not
quite close. Begin another oval, at a short distance from the last, 2 D
join to the last L of 1st oval, 2 D (L, 2 D 7 times) draw up, and work 3
more similar ovals.

_2nd Row._ Turn the work down. Tie to the foundation of the last oval.
Begin an oval 2 R D (L, 2 R D 6 times) draw up, not quite close. Tie to
the foundation of the next oval. Begin another oval, 2 R D join to the
last L of the last oval, 2 R D (L, 2 R D 5 times) draw up. Tie to the
foundation of the next oval, and work 2 more similar ovals.

_3rd Row._ Turn the work up. Tie to the foundation of the last oval of
the 2nd Row. Begin an oval, 2 D (L, 2 D 4 times) draw up. Tie to the
foundation of the next oval, and work 2 more similar ovals.

_4th Row._ _Plain ovals._ Turn the work down. Tie to the foundation of
the last oval of the 3rd Row. Begin an oval, 9 D, L, 9 D draw close; tie
to the foundation of the same, oval as before. Repeat, tying to the
remaining 2 ovals of 3rd Row.

Then tie to the thread between the last oval of the 2nd Row and the 1st
of the 3rd. Tie the threads together and fasten off.

_5th Row._ _Fill the figured shuttle with Evan's Boar's-head, No. 18._
Pass this cotton through the L of the 1st oval of 4th Row, until about
1/2 a yard is through; twist this thread round the little finger and
work 1 D (L, 1 D 4 times), tie to the L of the 2nd oval of 4th Row. (L,
1 D 5 times) tie to the L of the 3rd oval--fasten off. Six corn-flowers
are required for this Doyley.


_Centre-piece of the 1st Doyley._

_Fill both shuttles. The plain with No. 8. The figured with No. 18. Pin
No. 2._

Tie these cottons together, and with the plain shuttle thread round the
little finger work 6 D. Begin an oval with the figured shuttle, 2 R D.
(L, 2 R D 9 times) draw up tight. * With the plain shuttle thread round
the little finger, 6 D. Begin an oval, with the figured shuttle, 2 R D
(L, 2 R D 3 times) join to the 6th L of last oval, 2 R D (L, 2 R D 5
times) draw tight, and Repeat 10 times from *. Work 6 D, as before, and
Begin the 12th oval, 2 R D (L, 2 R D 3 times) join to the 6th L of last
oval; 2 R D, L, 2 R D join to the 4th L of the 1st oval; 2 R D (L, 2 R D
3 times) draw tight; and fasten off by drawing the fine cotton through
the space near the 1st stitch, and tying.


_To work in the centre._

Take a piece of No. 8 cotton; draw it, in loops, through each of the 12
centre loops of the ovals, and pass the other end of this cotton 3 times
through each loop--fasten off.


_For the foundation of the vandykes._

_Fill the plain shuttle with No. 8_, and measure off 2 lengths of 1 1/2
yards each; tie the 3 ends together. With the 1st length twisted round
the little finger work 2 D, L, 2 D, then put the second round the little
finger, leave a little space, and work 2 R D, L, 2 R D; repeat until
there are 66 Ls on each side. Fasten it neatly into a circle, by untying
the first knot and sewing the threads to each other.


_To unite this strip to the centre-piece._

_1st. Row._ _Fill both shuttles and join._ With the figured shuttle
thread round the little finger make a L with the plain shuttle thread; 3
D join to _any_ L of the strip, 3 D; L, with the plain shuttle thread; 3
D join to the 1st space to the right of the last join. 3 D (L with the
plain shuttle thread; 3 D join to the next L to the right; 3 D 4 times).
Begin an oval, with the figured shuttle, 3 D join to the next 2 Ls of
the strip; 3 D draw tight; 3 D join to the next L of the strip; 3 D tie
to the last L of plain shuttle thread; 3 D join to the next L of the
strip; 3 D tie to the last L, but one, of plain shuttle thread (3 D
join to the next L of the strip; 3 D, L, with the plain shuttle thread;
twice); 3 D join to the space, next the last L to which you joined, 3 D.
Repeat this row 6 times, or until all the Ls of the strip have been
joined in.

_In the repetitions, read "the next" instead of "any" in the first
join._

_2nd Row._ Hold the work in the hand, and between each oval continue
working with the figured shuttle thread round the little finger. 3 D, L,
3 D tie to the last L of plain shuttle thread, 3 D. Begin a plain oval
with the figured shuttle, 3 D, L, 3 D draw tight. 3 D tie to the next L
of plain shuttle thread, 3 D. Take the figured shuttle and tie to the L
of the plain oval, leaving about 1/4 inch of cotton. Begin an oval
(close to this tie), 7 D, take the centre circle and join to the space
over any of its ovals; 7 D draw tight. Tie as before to the L of the
plain oval; 3 D tie to the next L of plain shuttle thread, 3 D. Begin a
plain oval, with the figured shuttle; 3 D join to the L of the 1st plain
oval (this will be the 3rd tie in the same L); 3 D draw tight. 3 D tie
to the next plain shuttle L; 3 D, L, 3 D tie to the next plain shuttle
L, 3 D. Begin an oval with the figured shuttle; 3 D join to the next
space (to the right) of the centre piece; 3 D draw tight. 3 D tie to the
next L of plain shuttle thread; and repeat this row 6 times, or until
you have joined to the 12 spaces of the centre circle--fasten off.

[Illustration]


_To unite this Star and the Cornflowers._

_1st Row._ _Fill both shuttles as before, and join the threads._ With
the figured shuttle thread round the little finger. Make a L with the
plain shuttle thread, 3 D; and holding the work so as to fall over the
back of the hand, join to that L of the strip which is the 1st of the
two at the bottom of the vandykes; then join to the 2nd of these two Ls
3 D (L, with the plain shuttle thread; 3 D join to the next L of the
strip, 3 D 4 times); L with the plain shuttle thread; 3 D join to the
space of the strip, next the last L to which you joined, 3 D; L with the
plain shuttle thread; 3 D join to the next L of the strip 3 D; L with
the plain shuttle thread; 3 D join to the next space of the strip, 3 D
(L with the plain shuttle thread, 3 D join to the next L of the strip, 3
D 4 times), and repeat the row 6 times.

_2nd Row._ Hold the work in the hand, with the figured shuttle thread
round the little finger. Tie to the 1st plain shuttle L; 3 D, L, 3 D tie
to the last plain shuttle L, 3 D. Begin a figured shuttle oval; 3 D,
take a cornflower and join to the 1st L of its 5th row; 3 D draw tight.
With the figured shuttle thread round the little finger; 3 D tie to the
next plain shuttle L, 3 D, L, 3 D tie to the next plain shuttle L; 3 D
join to the 5th L of the last oval of the 1st row of the cornflower; 3 D
tie to the next plain shuttle L (3 D, L 4 times;) 3 D tie to the next
plain shuttle L; 3 D (L, 3 D 6 times) tie to the next plain shuttle L; 3
D (L, 3 D 4 times) tie to the next plain shuttle L; 3 D join to the 3rd
L of the 1st oval of 1st row of the next cornflower; 3 D tie to the next
plain shuttle L, 3 D. L, 3 D, tie to the next plain shuttle L; 3 D.
Begin an oval with the figured shuttle; 3 D join to the last L of the
5th row of this cornflower; 3 D draw tight. With the figured shuttle
thread round the little finger; 3 D tie to the next plain shuttle L; 3
D, L, 3 D tie to the next plain shuttle L, 2 D. Begin a figured shuttle
oval; 9 D join to the centre L of the 5th row of this cornflower; 9 D
draw tight. With the figured shuttle thread round the little finger, 2
D. And repeat 6 times, or until all the cornflowers are joined in--when
the Doyley will be complete.




SECOND DOYLEY.


_Fill the Plain Shuttle with Ardern's crochet cotton No. 8, and the
figured with Evan's Boar's-head No. 18, tie these threads together; Pin
No. 2._


_For the Chrysanthemums._

_1st Circle._ With the plain shuttle thread round the little finger (1
D, L 6 times).

_2nd Circle._ Tie to the 1st L (L, 1 D, L, 1 D tie to the next L 6
times).

_3rd Circle._ (L, 1 D, tie to the next L 12 times.)

_4th Circle._ (L, 1 D. Begin a plain shuttle oval; 4 D draw tight; tie
to the next L 12 times.)

_5th Circle._ (L, 1 D, L, 1 D, and tie in the same Ls as the 4th Circle;
12 times.)

_6th & 7th Circles._ (L, 1 D tie to the next L [or Ls made in the 5th
and 6th circles] 48 times.)

_8th Circle._ (1 D, L 5 times); 1 D attach to the 4th L of the 5th
circle. Attach to the 6th L of the 5th circle (1 R D, L 5 times); 1 R D
(attach to the next L but 1, of the 7th circle, twice). Repeat 6 times
from the beginning of the 8th circle, attaching successively to the 8th
and 10th, 12th and 14th, 16th and 18th, 20th and 22nd, 24th and 2nd,
loops of the 5th circle. Tie together and fasten off. Work 6 similar
chrysanthemums.


_For the intermediate Designs._

_Fill the plain shuttle with No. 8 cotton, and without cutting off from
the skein._--Begin a plain oval; 9 D, L, 9 D draw tight. Work 2 more
similar ovals close to each other. With the skein thread round the
little finger work 1 R D (L, 1 R D 14 times). Begin a looped oval (1 D,
L 15 times); 1 D draw tight and tie round the foundation thread of this
oval. With the skein thread round the little finger (L, 1 R D 8 times).
Begin a 2nd looped oval (1 D, L 5 times); 1 D join to the 10th L of last
oval; 1 D (L, 1 D 7 times) draw tight, and tie as before. With the skein
thread round the little finger (L, 1 R D 10 times); 10 single stitches;
tie to the 2nd L, after the join, of last oval; 20 single stitches tie
to the thread above the 3 plain ovals (1 D, L 14 times), 1 D. Begin a
looped oval (1 R D, L 15 times); 1 R D draw tight, and tie as before.
With the skein thread round the little finger (L, 1 D 8 times). Begin a
looped oval, 1 R D (L, 1 R D 5 times) join to the 10th L of last oval; 1
R D, L, 1 R D join to the space between the 10 and 20 single stitches; 1
R D (L, 1 R D 5 times) draw tight, and tie as before. With the skein
thread round the little finger (L, 1 D 9 times) draw 1 thread through
the L before the beginning of the single stitches, and fasten off. Work
6 similar designs.


_To join the Chrysanthemums and the Designs._

_Fill the figured shuttle with Evan's Boar's-head, No. 18; and do not
sever from the reel._--Taking care to hold the design with the right
side up; tie to the 3rd L of the 1st 9. With the reel cotton round the
little finger, 2 D (L, 2 D 8 times). Begin an oval, 10 D join to the L
before the beginning of the single stitches; 10 D draw tight, and tie
round the foundation thread. With the reel cotton round the little
finger (L, 2 D 9 times) tie to the 3rd L of the 2nd 9 of the design; 2 D
(L, 2 D 4 times), take a chrysanthemum and join to any L of its 7th
circle, not yet joined to; 2 D (L, 2 D 3 times) tie to the 6th L of the
2nd 8 of the design; 2 D (L, 2 D 4 times) join to the next unjoined L of
the chrysanthemum, to the right; 2 D (L, 2 D 3 times) tie to the 1st L
of the 2nd 8 of the design; 2 D (L, 2 D 8 times). Begin an oval, 8 D
join to the 11th L of the 2nd 14 of the design, 8 D draw tight and tie
as before. With the reel thread round the little finger (L, 2 D 6 times)
attach to the L of the 1st plain oval of the design. Begin an oval, 8 D,
L, 8 D draw tight. Attach to the L of the 3rd oval of the 2nd and in
succession to the 3rd, 4th, 5th, 6th and 1st designs. With the reel
thread round the little finger, work 2 D tie with the reel thread,
successively, to each of the 6 last Ls, working 2 D after each tie.
Begin an oval, 8 D join to the 11th L of the 1st 14 of the last design
joined to; 8 D draw tight and tie as before. Tie with the reel thread to
the next 4 Ls, and work 2 D between each tie; (L, 2 D 4 times) tie to
the 1st L of the 1st 8 of the same design; 2 D (L, 2 D 3 times) join to
the 2nd unjoined L of Chrysanthemum to the right of the last join; 2 D
(L, 2 D 4 times) tie to the 6th L of the 1st 8 of this design; 2 D (L, 2
D 3 times) join to the next unjoined L of Chrysanthemum to the right of
the last join; 2 D (L, 2 D 8 times). Repeat from the beginning 6 times,
or until all the chrysanthemums and designs are joined in, then draw one
thread through the 1st made L and fasten off.


_For the centre-piece of the Second Doyley._

_Fill both the shuttles, and join the threads together._ Begin an oval
with the plain shuttle, close up to the join; work the 2nd single stitch
(L, 1 D 11 times); L work the 1st single stitch, draw up very tight.
With the plain shuttle thread round the little finger, tie to the 1st L
of oval (L, 1 D tie to the next L of the oval 12 times). (Begin an oval
with the plain shuttle; 3 D join to a L of any of the 12 plain ovals of
the Doyley; 3 D draw close. With the plain shuttle thread round the
little finger, 2 D tie to the next L of the last round 12 times), fasten
off, and the Doyley will be complete.

[Illustration]




THIRD DOYLEY.


_Roses for the Third Doyley. Fill the plain shuttle with Ardern's
crochet cotton No. 8. Pin No. 3._

_1st Circle._ Begin an oval 2 D, L, 7 D, L, 7 D, L, 2 D draw close.
(Begin another oval, 2 D join to the last L of the last oval, 7 D, L, 7
D, L, 2 D draw close. Repeat 4 times.) Begin another oval 2 D, join to
the last L of the last oval, 7 D, L, 7 D join to the first L of the
first oval, 2 D draw close.

_2nd Circle._ Tie to the foundation thread of the first oval of the
first circle. Begin an oval 2 D, L, 10 D, L, 2 D draw close. (Tie to the
foundation thread of the next oval of the first circle. Begin an oval, 2
D join to the last L of the last oval, 10 D, L, 2 D draw close, and
repeat 4 times.) Tie to the foundation thread of the next oval of the
first circle. Begin an oval, 2 D join to the last L of the last oval, 10
D join to the 1st L of the 1st oval of the 2nd circle, 2 D draw close.

_3rd Circle._ Tie to the foundation thread of the first oval of the 2nd
circle. Begin an oval, 2 D, L, 6 D, L, 2 D draw close. (Tie to the
foundation thread of the next oval of the 2nd circle. Begin an oval, 2 D
join to the last L of the last oval, 6 D, L, 2 D draw close and repeat 4
times.) Tie to the foundation thread of the next oval of the 2nd
circle. Begin an oval, 2 D join to the last L of the last oval, 6 D join
to the 1st L of the 1st oval of the 3rd circle, 2 D draw close.

_4th Circle._ Begin an oval at a little distance, 1 D join to the
foundation thread of the 1st, and in succession to the 2nd, 3rd, 4th,
5th, and 6th ovals of the 3rd circle, and work 1 D after each join, draw
close and fasten off.

Work 12 similar Roses for this Doyley.


_For the Centre. Fill the figured shuttle with Evan's Boar's-head No.
18, and Pin No. 2._

_1st Row._ Begin an oval, 3 D, L, 3 D draw close, and work 12 similar
ovals, leaving 1/2 an inch of cotton between each. Tie the threads
together and fasten off.

_2nd Row._ Measure off 1/2 a yard of cotton from the shuttle, twist it
round the little finger, and work 1 D. (Put this 1/2 yard round the
space of cotton between two of the ovals of the 1st Row, 1 D repeat 12
times), fasten off.

_3rd Row._ _Refil the plain shuttle, and tie to the figured._ (Begin a
plain shuttle L, 5 D join to the L of any of the ovals of the 1st Row, 5
D draw close. With the figured shuttle thread on the little finger (L, 2
D 5 times) repeat 12 times) tie to the foundation thread of the 1st
oval.

_4th Row._ With the plain shuttle thread on the little finger (1 D, L 14
times). [Begin a figured shuttle oval, 4 R D (L, 2 R D 9 times) join to
the L over the next plain shuttle oval (to the right) of the 3rd Row (2
R D, L 9 times), 4 R D draw close. With the plain shuttle thread on the
little finger (L, 1 D 14 times) tie to the L over the next plain shuttle
oval to the right. _For the leaves, take Pin No. 3._ (1 D, L 3 times) 4
D, 1st L, 2 D join to the 8th L of the last 14, 2 D join to the 6th L of
the last 14, 4 D, L, 4 D tie to the foundation thread under the 1st L of
the leaf. Begin a figured shuttle oval, 3 D, L, 3 D draw close. With the
plain shuttle thread on the little finger, 4 D, 2nd L, 4 D join to the
last L before the figured shuttle oval, 4 D, L, 2 D, L, 2 D tie to the
foundation thread under the 2nd L, 2 D join to the last L, 5 D, L, 1 D,
L, 5 D, L, 2 D tie to the space of foundation cotton after the last tie,
2 D join to the last L; 2 D, L, 4 D, L, 4 D tie to the space after last
tie, 4 D. Begin a figured shuttle oval, 3 D join to the L of the last
figured shuttle oval, 3 D draw close. With the plain shuttle thread on
the little finger, 4 D join to the last L, 4 D, * L, 2 D, L, 2 D tie to
the foundation thread by the last figured shuttle oval, 4 D join to the
3rd of the 1st 3 Ls of the leaf; 1 D join to the 2nd of the 1st 3 Ls, 1
D join to the 1st of the 1st 3 Ls, 1 D tie to the L over the plain
shuttle oval as before. _Pin No. 2_, 1 D (L, 1 D 6 times) join to the
last L made; 1 D, (L, 1 D twice) join to the last made L but one; 1 D
(L, 1 D 4 times) and repeat 6 times.] In working it for the 6th time, it
will be necessary to work from the asterisk thus. Join to the 10th L of
the 1st 14, 2 D join to the 7th L of the 1st 14, 2 D tie to the
foundation thread by the figured shuttle oval, 4 D join to the 3rd of
the 1st 3 Ls of the leaf 1 D join to the 2nd of the 1st 3 Ls, 1 D join
to the 1st of the 1st 3 Ls, 1 D tie together and fasten off.


_To join in the Roses. Fill the figured shuttle and do not cut off from
the reel._

_1st Row._ With the reel thread round the little finger, L, with the
shuttle thread, 2 D (L, 2 D 4 times) L, with the shuttle thread, 2 D (L,
2 D twice) join to the 1st L of the four at the top of the leaves of the
centre-piece, holding it over the back of the hand, the right side up: 2
D, L, 2 D; L with the shuttle thread; 2 D, L, 2 D join to the 2nd L of
the 4 at the top of this leaf; then join to the 3rd L of the same 4;
leave the foundation thread rather loose; 2 D, L, 2 D, L with the
shuttle thread; 2 D, L, 2 D; join to the last L of the same 4; 2 D (L, 2
D twice). (L with the shuttle thread; 2 D (L, 2 D 4 times) twice.) Begin
an oval; 2 D (L, 2 D 4 times) join to the L over the large figured
shuttle oval of 4th Row; 2 D (L, 2 D 4 times) draw close. With the reel
thread round the little finger; 2 D (L, 2 D 4 times) repeat this row 6
times, joining successively to all the leaves of the centre-piece.

_2nd Row._ Turn the work so as to hold it in the hand; (L, 2 D 5 times)
take a rose and [join to the L at the point of one of its 1st circle of
ovals; 2 D (L, 2 D 4 times) tie to the last shuttle L; 2 D (L, 2 D 4
times) tie to the next shuttle L; 2 D (L, 2 D 4 times). Begin an oval;
2 D, L, 2 D join to the L of the next oval to the right of the same
rose; 2 D (L, 2 D 5 times). Take another rose and join to the L of one
of its ovals of the 1st circle; 2 D, L, 2 D draw close. With the reel
thread round the little finger; 2 D (L, 2 D 4 times) join to the same
shuttle L as last time; 2 D (L, 2 D 4 times) tie to the next shuttle L;
2 D, L, 2 D join to the L of the next oval of the same rose; 2 D tie to
the foundation thread _before_ the two joins of the last row, to the
point of the leaf; 2 D (L, 2 D twice) tie to the foundation thread
_after_ the same two joins; 2 D join to the L of the next oval of the
same rose; 2 D, L, 2 D (tie to the next shuttle L; 2 D (L, 2 D 4 times)
twice.) Begin an oval; 2 D (L, 2 D twice) join to the L of the next oval
of the same rose; 2 D (L, 2 D 5 times) join to the L of another rose; 2
D (L, 2 D twice) draw close. 2 D (L, 2 D 4 times) tie to the same
shuttle L as before; 2 D (L, 2 D 4 times) tie to the next shuttle L; * 2
D (L, 2 D 4 times) repeat 6 times.] The last time this is repeated,
finish at the asterisk, by tying to the 1st L of the row, and fastening
off. All the roses being joined in, the Doyley will be complete.




EDGING No. 1.

[Illustration]

    _This edging may be worked either in Ardern's crochet
         cotton No. 8, and Evan's Boar's-head No. 18. Which
         will make it about an inch deep,--and with Pin No.
         2._

    _Or in Evan's Boar's-head No. 18 and No. 30--Pin No. 3.
         In either case the plain shuttle must be filled
         with the coarser, and the figured with the finer
         cotton._


_1st Row._ Unite the two threads, begin an oval with the figured
shuttle; 2 R D (L, 2 R D 5 times) draw tight. With the plain shuttle
thread round the little finger; 2 D. Begin the 1st plain shuttle oval; 2
D (L, 2 D 3 times) draw tight. With the plain shuttle thread work; 4 D.
Begin the 2nd plain shuttle oval; 2 D join to the 3rd L of the 1st oval;
2 D (L, 2 D twice) draw tight. With plain shuttle thread, 2 D.

[Begin a figured shuttle oval; 2 R D (L, 2 R D 5 times) draw tight. With
the plain shuttle thread on the little finger 2 D. Begin a plain
shuttle oval; 2 D join to the last L of last plain shuttle oval; 2 D (L,
2 D twice) draw tight. With the plain shuttle thread, 4 D. Begin a plain
shuttle oval; 2 D join to the 3rd L of last oval; 2 D (L, 2 D twice)
draw tight. With the plain shuttle thread, 2 D--repeat twice.] Work
another figured shuttle oval. With the figured shuttle thread, on the
little finger, 2 R D (L, 2 R D 3 times). Begin a plain shuttle oval; 3 D
join to the 3rd L of the last plain shuttle oval; 1 D, L, 3 D draw
tight. With the figured shuttle thread (L, 2 R D 4 times).

To continue the pattern repeat what is between the brackets 3 times
instead of twice, and finish each pattern as in the 1st.

_2nd Row, or Foundation._ Begin an oval with the figured shuttle 2 D;
join to the centre L of the 1st figured shuttle oval; 2 D join to the
centre L of the 2nd figured shuttle oval; 2 D join to the centre L of
the 3rd figured shuttle oval; 2 D join to the centre L of the 4th oval;
draw up, but not quite tight. Tie to the 4th figured cotton L, leaving
rather more than 1/2 an inch of cotton, and begin the next oval at a
similar distance from the tie--repeat until the length worked is
finished.




EDGING No. 2.

[Illustration]


_Fill the plain shuttle with Ardern's crochet cotton No. 12. Pin No. 2._

_1st Row._ Work a sufficient length of ovals; 3 D (L, 3 D twice) not
drawn up quite close, and leaving 1/2 an inch of cotton, or more,
between each.


_Fill the figured shuttle with Evan's Boar's-head No. 20, and refil the
plain shuttle; tie the cottons together._

_2nd Row._ With the plain shuttle thread round the little finger; L, 2
D, L, 1 D tie to the 1st L of 1st oval; 1 D (L, 2 D twice); L, 1 D tie
to the 2nd L of the 1st oval; 1 D, L, 2 D tie to the thread between the
ovals. Repeat till all the ovals are finished.

_3rd Row._ Begin again by tying in the 1st L of last Row. With the plain
shuttle thread round the little finger; L, 1 D tie to the next L of the
2nd Row; (1 D, L, 1 D tie to the next L of the 2nd row twice;) 1 D, L, 1
D, tie to the same L; [1 D, L, 1 D tie to the next L of the 2nd Row
twice] 1 D, tie to the next L of 2nd Row, and repeat to the end of the
strip. Or this row may be worked without loops--if they are objected to.

_To make a strong foundation for this edging. Take the plain shuttle,
and tie to the foundation cotton of the ovals, twice, between each oval;
or on either side of the ties in the 2nd Row._




EDGING No. 3.

[Illustration]

      _Fill the shuttles with the same cottons as in the
          1st Edging, and use the same pins. The coarser
          sizes will make this edging an inch and a half
          deep. Tie the cottons together._


Begin an oval with the plain shuttle; 3 D, L, 3 D draw tight. With the
plain shuttle thread work 4 D.

Begin a looped oval with the plain shuttle; 2 D (L, 2 D 5 times) draw
very tight.

_The Leaf._ Begin a figured shuttle oval; 2 R D (L, 2 R D 5 times) join
to the 3rd L of the last row of the Rosette; 2 R D (L, 2 R D 14 times)
draw tight. At a little distance begin a plain oval with the figured
shuttle; 3 D join to the thread of the Leaf under the join; 3 D draw
close. Begin a plain oval with the figured shuttle quite close to the
last; 3 D join to the thread under the 9th L of the 14 of the Leaf; 3 D
draw tight. Tie round the foundation thread of the two plain ovals, and
leaving a short space of cotton, tie between the 4th and 5th Ls of the
14 of the Leaf; tie again below the plain ovals and round the foundation
thread of the leaf.

[With the plain shuttle thread round the little finger, 4 D. Begin a
plain shuttle oval, 3 D; L, 3 D draw close. Work a similar figured
shuttle oval, and tie round its foundation thread. Repeat twice.] With
the plain shuttle thread, 4 D.

_The Rosette._ Leave a space of each cotton. Begin a figured shuttle
oval, 1 D (L, 1 D 7 times) draw close. With the plain shuttle thread (L,
1 D 7 times). [Begin a figured shuttle oval, 1 D (L, 1 D 3 times) join
to the centre L of last oval; 1 D (L, 1 D 3 times) draw tight. With the
plain shuttle thread (L, 1 D 7 times). Repeat 3 times.] Tie to the
foundation thread of the 1st of these ovals. Tie to the 1st L of the 1st
7. With the plain shuttle thread round the little finger (L, 1 D tie to
the next L but one 11 times). Tie with the plain shuttle thread to the
15th L of the leaf; 1 D tie to the next L but one. Tie with the plain
shuttle thread to the L of the 1st figured shuttle oval; 1 D tie to the
next L but one. Tie with the plain shuttle thread to the L of the 2nd
figured shuttle oval; 1 D tie to the next L but one, [4 D. Begin a plain
shuttle oval, 3 D, L, 3 D draw tight. Begin a figured shuttle oval, 3 D
join to the 1st L of the last round of the Rosette; 3 D draw tight and
tie to its foundation thread. Repeat once, joining the figured shuttle
oval to the 2nd L of the Rosette,] 4 D. Repeat to the required length,
beginning with the looped oval.

_For the Foundation._ Tie the threads together in the L of the 1st plain
shuttle oval, holding the work in the hand and the right side up. With
the plain shuttle thread round the little finger (L, 1 D, 4 times) tie
in the 3rd L of the next oval, (L, 1 D, 4 times) tie in the L of the
next oval, [(L, 1 D, 3 times) tie in the L of the next oval. Repeat 3
times.] Repeat from the beginning till all the ovals are finished.




EDGING No. 4.

[Illustration]


_Fill the plain shuttle with Evan's Boar's-head No. 18, and the figured
with No. 30. Tie these threads together, Pin No. 3._

_1st Leaf, 1st Row._ With the plain shuttle thread round the little
finger (L, 1 D 10 times) tie to the 9th L (L, 1 R D tie to the next L 8
times), 1 R D attach to the foundation thread under the 1st L, 2 D (L, 2
D 4 times).

_2nd Leaf, 1st Row._ (L, 1 D 9 times) tie with the plain shuttle thread
to the 5th L (counting from the point) of the last Leaf. Turn the work,
1 R D tie to the 9th L (L, 1 R D tie to the next L 8 times) 1 R D attach
to the foundation thread under the 1st L; 2 D (L, 2 D 4 times). Repeat
the 2nd Leaf till a sufficient length is worked.

_2nd Row._ Tie to the foundation thread of the 1st Leaf of the 1st Row,
and tie the threads together. [With the plain shuttle thread round the
little finger 9 D. Begin a figured shuttle oval, 5 R D join to the 2
centre Ls of the four Ls; 5 R D draw close. With the plain shuttle
thread 9 D tie to the foundation thread of the 2nd Leaf under the 1st L,
and repeat.]

_3rd Row._ Refil the shuttles and tie the threads together in the space
under the last made oval; [2 D (L, 2 D 4 times) join to the space under
the next oval. Repeat to the end of the work.]




INSERTION No. 1.

[Illustration: _For the Strip._]


_Fill two plain shuttles and a figured one. With Ardern's crochet cotton
No. 12. Pin No. 1._

Tie these 3 threads together. With the thread of the 1st plain shuttle
round the little finger, and always working with the figured shuttle. 2
D, L, 2 D turn these stitches under the thumb, with the thread of the
2nd plain shuttle round the little finger; 2 R D, L, 2 R D, repeat until
you have twice the length you will require of insertion.


_Refil a plain shuttle and the figured; tie the threads together. Pin
No. 2._

Holding the right side of this strip upwards, tie to the 1st L: [with
the plain shuttle thread round the little finger (L, 1 R D 9 times) turn
the work. Begin a figured shuttle oval; (4 D join to the next L on the
same side of the strip twice;) 3 D join to the next L; 2 D join to the
next L; 3 D (join to the next L; 4 D twice) draw close. Tie to the
foundation thread of this oval. Turn the work; with the plain shuttle
thread on the little finger; (L, 1 R D 9 times) tie to the next L on the
same side of the strip--repeat to the end of the strip.]

Work the same way on the opposite side, beginning by tying to the L
above the centre of the last made oval.




INSERTION No. 2.

[Illustration]


  _Fill two plain shuttles, and one figured with Evan's Boar's-head
                        No. 28. Pin No. 3._

Work a similar strip to that in the 1st insertion.

Refil one shuttle. Hold the strip on the right side.

_1st Oval._ Begin an oval; 1 D (L, 1 D 4 times) join to the 1st L of the
strip; 1 D (L, 1 D 4 times) draw tight.

_2nd Oval._ Begin a second oval at a little distance; 1 R D (L, 1 R D 4
times) join to the last L on the same side of the strip, having turned
it; 1 R D (L, 1 R D 4 times) draw tight.

Repeat these two ovals, joining to the successive Ls on either side till
all are joined.




AN IMITATION GYMP.


_Work the strip of the 1st insertion in Brook's No. 8 crochet cotton.
Pin No. 1. It may also be worked, in black, in coarse purse silk._




       *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber's Note:

This text uses both corn-flowers and cornflowers.

Title page, full-stop changed to a comma (FARRINGDON STREET, AND)

Page 17, fullstop changed to comma after 4 D (finger, 4 D, 2nd L)

Page 17, "L's" changed to "Ls" to conform to majority of text (3 Ls of
the leaf)

Page 18, "L's" changed to "Ls" to conform to majority of text (the 1st 3
Ls, 1 D)

Page 25, "L's" changed to "Ls" to conform to majority of text (the 4th
and 5th Ls of)



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BATH TATTING BOOK***


******* This file should be named 26068.txt or 26068.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/6/0/6/26068



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
